Lets talk about manipulating strings.
The string object methods are too numerous to review
individually and you are probably very familiar
with many of them anyway.
The thing to remember about the String object is that the
index of the first character is always zero,
and the index of the last character
is the string length minus one.
Many string methods use a starting and ending index to copy,
replace, or search through the string.
The beginning index used in these methods is inclusive,
which means the method will use the character at that beginning index,
so if you want the first character
of your string used as part of the manipulation,
your starting index would be zero.
The ending index used in these methods is exclusive,
which means the character
at the ending index will not be included,
so if you want to include the last character in your string,
your ending index would be string.length().
We will talk about the following categories of methods
and show a few examples in each category.
First in comparison we got equals,
equals ignore case, content equals, compare to,
is empty and is blank.
For text searches contains, equals ignore case,
ends with, index of, last index of,
matches and starts with.
For text manipulation concat, join which was introduced
in Java eight, replace, replace all, replace first,
split, substring and subsequence.
And for text transformation, we've got chars which
was introduced in Java nine, code points also Java nine,
format, lines introduced in Java 11, repeat
also introduced in Java 11, strip, strip leading,
strip trailing, to char array, to lower case,
to upper case, trim and value of.
Let's talk about String comparison methods first
a little bit using this chart.
So first you have got equals equals.
That compares two objects,
and returns true when the reference is the same.
So I've got an equals method.
Now the object on equals is the same as equals equals,
but a string equals tests for the string
and tests for value.
The origination for the equals overrides
the object on the equals method.
Perimeter type can be any object,
however only a string might evaluate to true.
In terms of for what it returns,
it returns true if references are the same,
or if a perimeter object is a string
and the value is the same.
Equals ignore case tests the string
value ignoring case.
Perimeter type has to be a string,
and it returns true if two strings
have the same value, again ignoring the case.
Content equals compares the value
of string to the value in the perimeter.
The perimeter type is a char sequence.
It returns true if values in the string
and the perimeter are the same.
Compare to compares the value of string
to the value in the perimeter.
It originates from the interface comparable.
Perimeter type is string.
It returns zero if the values in the string are the same.
It returns a negative or positive number
if the strings are not equal.
And finally we got compare to ignore case,
which is basically identical to compare to,
but its ignoring the case in each string.
All right so let's now go ahead and create
a new class in our strings project we been working on.
I'll call this one string comparison.
All right I've pasted in some code there.
In terms of the code I've pasted in for this example,
see the task starting on line 12 and moving down,
we got some data to test.
What I've done when we scroll a little bit further,
I've created various methods to test
each of the different ways we can compare strings.
You can see that we got methods there to test
equals ignore case, test content equals,
test compare to method, test compare to ignore case method.
There's a few others.
We're setting up some test data at the top.
We are invoking the various tests as you can see down here.
Invoking those various methods.
It's pretty straight forward what I've done here so far.
Now at the moment because of the way I've set
up the tests with first string, second string,
second object and second sequence.
Using null in all those scenarios.
We're basically passing these null values
to the methods to start with.
Lets have a look at the results that we get
by doing that.
When looking at the results you can see
all but one method has thrown an exception.
Its only the equals equals operator
can have a null on the left side of the equation,
if you think about it that makes sense,
since all the other test methods are on a string
assumed not to be null.
We're going to use this code as a starting point
for our exercise ahead.
So what we actually want to do now,
we're going to make some changes to the test data we got.
Specifically gonna look at lines 23 through 26,
that's the code that we're gonna be changing there.
What I'm going to do first is change that to hello,
the first string on line 23.
To a string literal hello with H upper case.
Leave the second string as null for now.
We're going to assign second object
to be second string tele reference.
The second sequence we're also going to set
that to second string.
You can see in each case we're actually passing
one of two we got the first string.
We've either got the second string
or the second sequence being passed
to these various methods depending on the type we want.
Lets go ahead and run this again now.
This time we got some different results
than we had previously.
Here now we can see that the compare to
and content equals methods do not like
null references as their perimeters.
So we have a look its the last three methods
the last three method calls that we got
now pulling exceptions.
If we come down and have a look at those methods.
The last three methods we got the content equals,
compare to, and compare to ignore case.
They're the ones that filed with exceptions.
The reason for that, they don't like null
references in their perimeters.
Lets move on to something a bit more interesting
to test now.
We'll go back to our test data again.
We're going to change some values here again.
What I'll do is I'm gonna change the second string.
We're gonna change that to string hello one.
I'm using the string hello one with a capital H,
because I'm differentiating the values
based on the uppercase H and lowercase h.
I'm using string hello one with a capital H at the moment.
I won't change anything else, that's the only change.
Run the code again.
You can see we no longer got any exceptions.
The only other thing to note here
is that the compare to and compare to ignore case
evaluate to zero when they're equal.
Lets continue on and make a few other changes.
Go back to line 23 again.
This time instead of the string literal hello,
I'm gonna change it so the first string
now is equal to the value of string hello two.
You see that's defined on line 17.
I'm also gonna change second object
to point to the string builder that you find
on line 21.
That's hello string builder.
I'm going to do the same for the second sequence as well.
All right I'm going to run the code.
You can see here now that "equals equals" is false.
That's because string hello two and string hello one
no longer reference the same string,
or do not reference the same string.
The "equals" method is false because it only returns
true if the object being compared is a string
and the values are the same.
Its also interesting to note that "equals ignore case"
only accepts a string object that's a perimeter
whereas; the equals method may accept an object
but returns false if it gets anything but a string.
So at this point we've evaluated the comparators
with the different references and objects.
Lets now just focus on the string values.
We're going to go back to our test data
again on lines 23 onwards.
We're going to be changing the code
hello strings different now by the case.
At the moment on line 23 we got string hello two.
We're gonna come back here and use this reference
to string hello one, the one with the lower case h.
Leave the second string as it is there now.
I'm going to change the other two.
I'm going to change second object to equal
second string and same for the second sequence.
So at this point now we're focusing on strings
that are different by their case.
If we run this now.
So we can see now that we've run this
that equals ignore case is true,
and that compare to ignore case is zero
as we would expect for methods ignoring case.
What's more interesting is the compare to method
returning the number 32.
If your familiar with the index
of method on a string this might surprise you.
We'll talk more about the compare to method
later in the corse,
actually in the out of ordinary section video.
I do encourage you to play with this class,
with as many variations you can think of.
That's because the exam may test you on several,
as well as string builders versions which we'll
be exploring later in the corse.
Now before we move on to methods for searching text
in the next video,
there's two other methods which are comparative
in nature.
These are is empty and is blank
which return booleans.
The following slide demonstrates the difference
between these two methods.
Note that is blank is new to Java 11
as opposed to is empty.
So if your calling either of these methods
with string with a length of zero.
Is empty and is blank both evaluate to true.
Now if the string has only whitespace
characters as defined by character is whitespace,
note that is empty evaluates to false,
but is blank on the other hand evaluates to true.
All right so lets end the video here
and in the next one we'll start looking
at the strings text search methods.
See you in the next video.